# E_coli_DRIP-Seq_analysis

Scripts used for analysis of a DRIP-Seq data obtained for *E. coli*.

This repository contains a set of bash and python scripts which have been used for DRIP-Seq data analysis and visualization.
Raw sequencing data and some processed files can be retrieved from GEO datasets with accession GSE181945.

If you find this code useful and would like to use it in your own research, please, cite:
Sutormin D, Galivondzhyan A, Musharova O, Travin D, Rusanova A, Obraztsova K, Borukhov S, Severinov K. Interaction between transcribing RNA polymerase and topoisomerase I prevents R-loop formation in E. coli. Nat Commun. 2022 Aug 4;13(1):4524. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32106-5. PMID: 35927234; PMCID: PMC9352719.


## ChIP-Seq_analysis_pipeline_example.sh

Shell script that makes initial QC of sequencing data, followed by trimming and filtration procedure. 
After post-trimming QC, processed reads are mapped to the reference genome, producing SAM-files which are
converted to BAM, sorted and indexed. Additionally, coverage depth is computed for initial BAm files and 
for ones after removal of PCR-duplicates.

**Requirements:** factqc, trimmomatic, bwa, samtools (1.9 or higher), sra-toolkit, shell

**Input:** Raw reads files (FASTQ), Genome file (FASTA)

**Output:** FastQC reports, SAM files, sorted and indexed BAM files, BED files (coverage depth)


## Bed_to_wig_converter.py

Script takes BED files with coverage depth and converts them to WIG format.

**Requirements:** Python 2 or 3

**Input:** BED files

**Output:** WIG files


## Compute_fold_enrichment.py

Takes two WIG files (for IP and Mock control) and computes by-position fold enrichment. 

**Requirements:** Python 2 or 3

**Input:** WIG files (IP and Mock control)

**Output:** WIG file with Fold Enrichment


## Average_wig_files.py

Takes a set of WIG files (organized as a dictionary) and computes by-position average WIG.

**Requirements:** Python 2 or 3

**Input:** WIG files to be averaged

**Output:** Averaged WIG file


## Return_sequences_under_peaks.py

Takes output of MACS2 for peaks called (NarrowPeak intervals), returns sequences under the peaks as a MFA file,
plots distribution of peaks GC-content in comparison to genome GC-content and the distribution of peaks widths.

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** Peaks coordinates (NarrowPeaks), reference genome (FASTA)

**Output:** MFA with sequences under the peaks, plots


## Return_reproducible_peaks.py

Takes a dictionary of narrowPeak files with peaks called by MACS2 for different biological replicas.
Identifies reproducible regions and writes them as a broadPeak file.

**Requirements:** Python 2 or 3

**Input:** Peaks coordinates (NarrowPeaks), reference genome (FASTA)

**Output:** Reproducible peaks coordinates (broadPeak)


## FE_for_peaks.py

Takes a dictionary of narrowPeak files with peaks called by MACS2 for different biological replicas or experimental conditions.
Returns average fold enrichment of regions as computed by Compute_fold_enrichment.py and Average_wig_files.py in broadPeak file format.

**Requirements:** Python 2 or 3

**Input:** Peaks coordinates (NarrowPeaks), reference genome (FASTA), WIG files with FE info

**Output:** Peaks with fold enrichment (broadPeak)


## Enrichment_of_regions_comparision.py

The script tests sets of genomic intervals (Peaks, TUs, BIMEs-1, BIMEs-2, IHF sites, Fis sites, H-NS sites, MatP sites, etc.)
for the enrichment with some continously distributed character CDC (RNApol fold enrichment, score, GC%, etc.) (t-test). 
Plots CDC1 vs CDC2 determind for intervals. Computes correlation of CDCs in intervals. Make violin-plots of CDS in intervals vs other sites.

**Requirements:** Python 2 or 3

**Input:** Peaks coordinates (NarrowPeaks), continously distributed character (WIG)

**Output:** Pearson correlation, plots CDS1 vs CDS2, violin plots


## FE_over_US_GB_DS.py

Takes wig tracks of different genome features (GC%, MukB ChiP-Seq, etc.). Computes signal over TUs upstream (US),
downstream (DS) and over TUs bodies (GB). 

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** Files with signal data (WIG), genome annotation (GFF or BroadPeak), regions to be omitted (BroadPeak)

**Output:** WIG files with cumulative signal over all TUs, TAB files with average signal for each of TUs, plot of average signal over all TUs, histogram of the signal over TUs


## Plot_signal_over_transcription_units.py

Takes signal over transcriptions units in WIG format generated by FE_over_US_GB_DS.py, plots cumulative signal over TUs upstream, downstream and TU bodies.

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** WIG files with cumulative signal over TUs sets

**Output:** Plots with cumulative signal


## Combine_genes_data.py

Takes TAB files generated by FE_over_US_GB_DS.py and assembles them into one dataframe. Computes and plot correlation matrix for datasets combining.

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** TAB files with average signals for each of TUs

**Output:** TAB file contains all signals, heatmap represents corralation matrix.


## Make_gene_synonyms_database.py

Takes different databases (Uniprot, Ecocyc, RegulonDB, GO terms, E. coli W3110 annotation) describes E. coli genes and merges them into one database. 

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** Uniprot, Ecocyc, RegulonDB, GO terms, E. coli W3110 annotation, TAB with average signals for each of TUs

**Output:** Merged database of gene names synonyms.


## manage_synonyms.py

Class that contains functions for retriving of gene name synonyms.

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** Merged database of gene names synonyms. Guery - gene name.

**Output:** Gene name synonyms.


## Use_synonyms_table.py

Adds information about gene product (membrane protein or not) and promoter (number and names of TFs) to TAB table with average signals for each of TUs generated 
by Combine_genes_data.py.

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** Merged database of gene names synonyms. TAB with average signals for each of TUs.

**Output:** Extended TAB with average signals for each of TUs


## Analyse_groups_of_genes.py

Takes extended TAB with average signals for each of TUs generated by Use_synonyms_table.py, computes distributions of signal for different groups of genes: 
membrane protein encoding, having complex promoters, genes with both features. Sorts dataframe by some character (TopoA -Rif FE by default) and computes 
statistics for different features (membrane protein, complex promoter, GC-content, level of Expression, signal of RNAPol, Gyrase, TopoIV) to be 
associated with main character (signal of TopoA -Rif by default).

**Requirements:** Python 3

**Input:** Extended TAB with average signals for each of TUs

**Output:** Plots with signal distribution, extending-frame plots describing the stability of feature divirgence.


## Normalize_calc_FE.py

Script for advanced data analysis. Not completed yet.


